.\" Copyright (c) 1983 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)nroff.1	6.2 (2.11BSD) 2020/3/24
.\"
.Dd October 22, 1996
.Dt NROFF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nroff
.Nd text formatting
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl F Ns Ar tabdir
.Op Fl M Ns Ar tmacdir
.Op Fl T Ns Ar terminal
.Op Fl m Ns Ar name
.Op Fl o Ns Ar list
.Op Fl r Ns Ar aN
.Op Fl s Ns Ar page
.Op Fl ehinq
.Op Ar
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
formats text in the named files for typewriter-like devices.
See also
.Xr troff 1 .
The full capabilities of
.Nm
are described in the
.Ar Nroff/Troff User's Manual.
.Pp
If no
.Ar file
argument is present, the standard input is read.
An argument consisting of a single dash
is taken to be a file name corresponding to the standard input.
.Pp
The options, which may appear in any order so long as they appear
.Ar before
the files, are:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl F Ns Ar tabdir
Alternate directory for terminal tab files.
.It Fl M Ns Ar tmacdir
Alternate directory for macro files.
.It Fl o Ns Ar list
Print only pages whose page numbers appear in the comma-separated
.Ar list
of numbers and ranges.  A range
.Ar N Ns \- Ns M
means pages
.Ar N
through
.Ar M ;
an initial
.Ar \-N
means from the beginning to page
.Ar N ;
and a final
.Ar N Ns \-
means from
.Ar N
to the end.
.It Fl n Ns Ar N
Number first generated page
.Ar N .
.It Fl s Ns Ar N
Stop every
.Ar N
pages.
.Nm
will halt prior to every
.Ar N
pages (default
.Ar N =1)
to allow paper loading or changing, and will resume upon receipt of a newline.
.It Fl m Ns Ar name
Load the macro file
.Ar tmac.name 
before processing input files.
.It Fl r Ns Ar aN
Set register
.Ar a
(one-character) to
.Ar N .
.It Fl i
Read standard input after the input files are exhausted.
.It Fl q
Invoke the simultaneous input-output mode of the
.Ar rd
request.
.It Fl T Ns Ar name
Prepare output for specified terminal or printer.  Installed terminal
descriptions can be found in the
.Ar /usr/share/term/
directory.
.It Fl e
Produce equally-spaced words in adjusted lines, using full terminal resolution.
.It Fl h
Use output tabs during horizontal spacing
to speed output and reduce output character count.
Tab settings are assumed to be every 8 nominal character widths.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm nroff :
.Bl -tag -width TERMTAB_PATH
.It Ev TERMTAB_PATH
Path to the terminal description files.
.It Ev TMAC_PATH
Path to the macro packages.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/tmac/tmac.* -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/tmac/tmac.*
system macro files.
.It Pa /usr/share/term/*
terminal driving tables for
.Nm nroff .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr troff 1 ,
.Xr eqn 1 ,
.Xr tbl 1 ,
.Xr soelim 1 ,
.Xr col 1 ,
.Xr ms 7 ,
.Xr me 7 ,
.Xr mdoc 7 ,
.Xr mdoc.samples 7
.Rs
.%T "Nroff/Troff user's manual"
.%A J. F. Ossanna
.Re
.Rs
.%T A TROFF Tutorial
.%A B. W. Kernighan,
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
text formatter appeared in Version 4 AT&T UNIX.
.Sh BUGS
Too many internal tables with a size set at compile time.
